# This document is required.

# AES Presentation Slides

## What is AES?
AES or Advanced Encryption Standard is a specification for the encryption of electronic data. AES uses symmetric encryption, meaning it requires the same key to encrypt and decrypt data.

AES is a block cipher, so it encrypts data in blocks, always 128 bits in length. AES uses a specific algorithm comprised of several operations used to obscure the relationship between the plaintext data block and the ciphertext data block. Each operation is repeated for a specific number of rounds, which depends on the key size. 

AES has three different versions available, with the only major difference being the size of the key that is used to execute its algorithms. Each version has the key size specified in its name. There is AES-128, AES-192, and AES-256.  

## What’s the difference between each version of AES?
If the key length for AES gets bigger, there is, of course, more security. Because AES-256 has a larger key, it will be significantly more difficult to break compared to its smaller counterpart, AES-128. 
However, no matter the key size, each version of AES is incredibly secure, and both versions are still considered safe to use for encrypting sensitive information.

Additionally, there is the power it takes to encrypt using each version of AES. AES-128 is typically used because it's much quicker and takes less computational power than AES-256 but still maintains security.  

The main difference that comes from key sizes is that the number of rounds for each operation also differs between each, with 10, 12, and 14 rounds respectively.

## Blocks in AES
Since AES is a block cipher, the first step in encrypting data is dividing the plaintext into data blocks of four bytes by four bytes, for a total of 128 bits. 

For example, if you wanted to encrypt a phrase like 'AES is a very secure method of encryption', then the first block would look like this:

A |	i | v |	s
--- |--- | --- | ---
E	| s |	e |	e
S	|	\	 | r | c
\ 	| a	| y	| u

The rest of the plaintext is then continued in the other blocks. When a block has no plaintext left to put in it, it puts in padding bytes, because AES needs complete blocks to be able to function.

### Initialization
In AES, these plaintext blocks are initialized when they are copied into data structures known as `state arrays`. A state array simply refers to the data structure that is used to hold the results after each encryption/decryption process, and is the same as representing the 4x4 matrix of bytes. 
It is the state array that undergoes each transformation after every round. 

## What are keys and rounds in AES?
Depending on the key, each variant of AES has a different number of rounds. The 'key' in AES is made of 32-bit (or 4 bytes) 'words', so the cipher key in AES-256, for example, would be 8 'words' long. 

AES then uses this cipher key to perform a key expansion routine that generates a key schedule. 


The key schedule then, for AES-256, is 60 words, or 240 bytes.


adding this info later:
AES uses a key schedule to expand a short key into several separate round keys. 

The AES algorithm takes the cipher key, `K`, and performs a key expansion routine to generate a key schedule. The key expansion generates a total amount of `x` words, where `x` is the initial set of words `(Nb)` multiplied by the number of rounds plus 1. 
`x = Nb(Nr+1)`
`Nb = initial set of words (number of columns comprising the state)`
`Nr = rounds`
`Nr` rounds require `Nb` words of key data. The key schedule generated by key expansion is a linear array of 4-byte words, known as `(W num)`, where num cannot exceed `x` or `Nb(Nr+1)`.

## Other constants used in AES

### Initialization Vector
In AES, an initialization vector is often generated to randomize encryption. 
The IV is meant to be a unique and unpredictable value, that does not need to be hidden like the key does. 

## AES Modes

### ECB
Electronic Code Book (ECB) is the simplest block cipher mode of AES because it encrypts every block of plaintext data separately. Because the other blocks do not rely on previous ciphertext blocks for encryption, it is the least secure of all the modes. When AES uses ECB mode, identical plaintext blocks will result in identical ciphertext blocks, which can hinder security, as it is easier to identify identical blocks and guess the original. 
(example here if time permits)
Although ECB is faster and easier to implement, it is much more limited in terms of encryption and security.

### CBC
Cipher block chaining is the most commonly used mode when using AES. Unlike EBC, CBC uses previous ciphertext blocks for the encryption of the next block. 

### CFB

### OFB

### CTR

(info here)

## Operations in AES
AES consists of several rounds that use four main functions to encrypt blocks of plaintext. The following operations are done in every round except for MixColumns, which is omitted from the final round.
  * SubBytes
  * ShiftRows
  * MixColumns
  * AddRoundKey

### SubBytes
The SubBytes operation uses substitution to change each byte of the block with another block according to a specific fixed table. This table is known as the substitution box, or `S-box`. Each byte is substituted independently from the others within each block. 
The `S-box` is a 16 x 16 Matrix (insert image here). This substitution method is meant to make it harder to find patterns in encrypted data.

### ShiftRows
In this transformation, bytes in each row of the block are repeatedly shifted to the left. The first row remains the same, while the second row shifts over one, the third shifts over two, and the last row shifts over three. (insert image here)

### MixColumns
MixColumns uses Matrix multiplication and multiplies a constant matrix with each column in the state array to get a new one for the resultant state array. This step is omitted in the last round, for several reasons. The purpose of mixColumns is to increase the complexity of the transformation, therefore spreading greater encryption across the entire block. However, this is not needed by the last round as the encryption process is nearing its end. Leaving out mixColumns for the last round does not affect security and only makes the end of the process more efficient. 

### Add Round Key
The block data in the state array is xored against the given key generated and passes on that state array as input to the next step.

## To be added...
Inverse AES Functions (decryption)

Security of AES

Why is it so good/secure?

Recent cyber attacks

AES cryptanalysis(?)

How are keys securely distributed? (DH key exchange)

Possible future developments of aes(?)
